README.md, before:

# Perceived Lightness of Faces Experiments
## Academic Background
Can cognitive constructs such as beliefs, desires or expectations directly affect our perceptual experience of the world? Or is perception encapsulated from the influence of such "high-level" cognitive constructs? This has been an enduring debate in the literature on psychology and perception (for a review, see Chapter 3 of [Stephens, 2015](#step2015)). 

One highly cited example in this debate is a 2006 paper from researchers at Harvard ([Levin & Banaji, 2006](#lev2006)). They claimed to demonstrate that the perceived race of a face (a high-level cognitive construct) can alter how light its skin looks (a low-level perception) regardless of how light the skin actually is. Specifically, they showed that observers rate a prototypical African-American face as darker than a prototypical Caucasian face even when the faces have the same average luminance and contrast. 

As part of my PhD dissertation I showed that the effects demonstrated by Levin & Banaji go away when you conceal the purpose of the experiment from participants ([Stephens, 2015](#step2015)). In other words, I showed that their effects can be explained as response bias due to the demand characteristics of the experiment (for a different objection, see [Firestone & Scholl, 2015](#fire2015); for a reply, see [Baker & Levin, 2016](#baker2016)).

This repository contains the code I used in for my experiments. All code was written for Matlab's Psychophysics Toolbox (http://psychtoolbox.org/). 

## Custom Functions
In addition to the main experiment functions (MAIN_***.m), there are several other custom functions that are helpful when working with Matlab and the Psychophysics toolbox.
 - GetEchoInput &ndash; Adapted from the Psychtoolbox function GetEchoString.m. Shows participants an image on a Psychtoolbox window along with a display message and takes inputs.  
 - GetImgs.m &ndash; Retreives the names and RGB matrices (necessary for showing the images on screen using Psyctoolbox) for all images in a subdirectory.
 - GetNexSubID.m &ndash; Gets an ID for the next participant based on the IDs of previous participants, which are stored in a subdirectory. Particpant IDs are simply increasing numbers (i.e., participant 1, 2, 3, etc...).
 - MkWhiteNoise.m &ndash; Generates a rectangle of Gaussian white noise to be displayed between each stimulus, i.e. during the interstimulus interval (ISI). 
 - PsychtoolboxSetup.m &ndash; A script that runs the functions necessary to get Psychtoolbox ready for running an experiment.  
 - RePAndPermVects.m &ndash; Takes in possibly multiple input vectors, copies each element of each vector numRepeats number of times and then randomly permutes each vector into a larger vector.
 - ShowImgUntilKeyPressed.m &ndash; Psychtoolbox function that takes in an image filename and displays the the image in the current PsychToolbox window until a key is pressed. 


 ## Experiments
 ### Experiment LF0
 In this experiment, participants view several faces, one and a time, and must judge whether they are racially black or white ('b' for black, 'w' for white). There are only actually 2 different faces &ndash; the prototypical African-American face and the prototypical Caucausian face used in [Levin & Banaji's (2006)](lev2006) original experiment. However, each face has been duplicated several times, with each duplicate made either darker or lighter in luminance than the original. Odd-numbered participants see the faces upright and even-numbered participants see them inverted.

 ### Experiment MLF0
 Similar to experiment *LF0*, except uses "morphed faces" as stimuli, which are morphs between a Caucasin face and an African-American face. There are two versions of each morph, one wearing the Caucasian hairstyle and one wearing the African-American hairstyle. The goal of this experiment is to create a set of racially ambiguous faces that participants perceive as Caucasian when wearing one hairstyle but as African-American when wearing another hairstyle. See the ReadMe file in /MLF0 for more details. 

 ## References
 <a id="baker2016"></a>Baker, L.J., & Levin, D.T. (2016). The face-race lightness illusion is not driven by low-level stimulus properties: An empirical reply to Firestone and Scholl (2014). *Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 23*, 1989–1995. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-016-1048-z
 
 <a id="fire2015"></a>Firestone, C., & Scholl, B.J. (2015). Can you *experience* ‘top-down’ effects on perception?: The case of race categories and perceived lightness. *Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 22*, 694–700. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-014-0711-5
 
 <a id="lev2006"></a>Levin, D. T., & Banaji, M. R. (2006). Distortions in the perceived lightness of faces: The role of race categories. *Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 135(4)*, 501–512. https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.135.4.501

<a id="step2015"></a>Stephens, K. D. (2015). *Texture preference, facial attractiveness, and the effect of race on lightness perception* [Doctoral Dissertation, Unversity of California, Irvine]. ProQuest.

Commit message:

Updated 'more to come' section

README.md, after:

# Perceived Lightness of Faces Experiments
## Academic Background
Can cognitive constructs such as beliefs, desires or expectations directly affect our perceptual experience of the world? Or is perception encapsulated from the influence of such "high-level" cognitive constructs? This has been an enduring debate in the literature on psychology and perception (for a review, see Chapter 3 of [Stephens, 2015](#step2015)). 

One highly cited example in this debate is a 2006 paper from researchers at Harvard ([Levin & Banaji, 2006](#lev2006)). They claimed to demonstrate that the perceived race of a face (a high-level cognitive construct) can alter how light its skin looks (a low-level perception) regardless of how light the skin actually is. Specifically, they showed that observers rate a prototypical African-American face as darker than a prototypical Caucasian face even when the faces have the same average luminance and contrast. 

As part of my PhD dissertation I showed that the effects demonstrated by Levin & Banaji go away when you conceal the purpose of the experiment from participants ([Stephens, 2015](#step2015)). In other words, I showed that their effects can be explained as response bias due to the demand characteristics of the experiment (for a different objection, see [Firestone & Scholl, 2015](#fire2015); for a reply, see [Baker & Levin, 2016](#baker2016)).

This repository contains the code I used in for my experiments. All code was written for Matlab's Psychophysics Toolbox (http://psychtoolbox.org/). 

## Custom Functions
In addition to the main experiment functions (MAIN_***.m), there are several other custom functions that are helpful when working with Matlab and the Psychophysics toolbox.
 - GetEchoInput &ndash; Adapted from the Psychtoolbox function GetEchoString.m. Shows participants an image on a Psychtoolbox window along with a display message and takes inputs.  
 - GetImgs.m &ndash; Retreives the names and RGB matrices (necessary for showing the images on screen using Psyctoolbox) for all images in a subdirectory.
 - GetNexSubID.m &ndash; Gets an ID for the next participant based on the IDs of previous participants, which are stored in a subdirectory. Particpant IDs are simply increasing numbers (i.e., participant 1, 2, 3, etc...).
 - MkWhiteNoise.m &ndash; Generates a rectangle of Gaussian white noise to be displayed between each stimulus, i.e. during the interstimulus interval (ISI). 
 - PsychtoolboxSetup.m &ndash; A script that runs the functions necessary to get Psychtoolbox ready for running an experiment.  
 - RePAndPermVects.m &ndash; Takes in possibly multiple input vectors, copies each element of each vector numRepeats number of times and then randomly permutes each vector into a larger vector.
 - ShowImgUntilKeyPressed.m &ndash; Psychtoolbox function that takes in an image filename and displays the the image in the current PsychToolbox window until a key is pressed. 


 ## Experiments
 ### Experiment LF0
 In this experiment, participants view several faces, one and a time, and must judge whether they are racially black or white ('b' for black, 'w' for white). There are only actually 2 different faces &ndash; the prototypical African-American face and the prototypical Caucausian face used in [Levin & Banaji's (2006)](lev2006) original experiment. However, each face has been duplicated several times, with each duplicate made either darker or lighter in luminance than the original. Odd-numbered participants see the faces upright and even-numbered participants see them inverted.

 ### Experiment MLF0
 Similar to experiment *LF0*, except uses "morphed faces" as stimuli, which are morphs between a Caucasin face and an African-American face. There are two versions of each morph, one wearing the Caucasian hairstyle and one wearing the African-American hairstyle. The goal of this experiment is to create a set of racially ambiguous faces that participants perceive as Caucasian when wearing one hairstyle but as African-American when wearing another hairstyle. See the ReadMe file in /MLF0 for more details. 

 ### More to Come
 I am in the process of uploading ALL of my old experiment code onto GitHub. This is just the beginning. Because I want to double-check all of the code (make sure it works, is properly commented, etc.), the process is slow-going. If this project interests you, check back in a couple of days as there will likely be more code uploaded. 

 ## References
 <a id="baker2016"></a>Baker, L.J., & Levin, D.T. (2016). The face-race lightness illusion is not driven by low-level stimulus properties: An empirical reply to Firestone and Scholl (2014). *Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 23*, 1989–1995. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-016-1048-z
 
 <a id="fire2015"></a>Firestone, C., & Scholl, B.J. (2015). Can you *experience* ‘top-down’ effects on perception?: The case of race categories and perceived lightness. *Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 22*, 694–700. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-014-0711-5
 
 <a id="lev2006"></a>Levin, D. T., & Banaji, M. R. (2006). Distortions in the perceived lightness of faces: The role of race categories. *Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 135(4)*, 501–512. https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.135.4.501

<a id="step2015"></a>Stephens, K. D. (2015). *Texture preference, facial attractiveness, and the effect of race on lightness perception* [Doctoral Dissertation, Unversity of California, Irvine]. ProQuest.
